MentoV3 whitepaper: Significant rewrite (almost from scratch) with focus on FPMM feature instead of stablecoin factory (#2)
mento-protocol/whitepaper: main.tex

In the Mento CDP Liquidity Strategy, flash-swaps work as follows:
\begin{itemize}
  \item \textbf{Flash\hyp swap expand} – If traders have reduce the JPY.m reserves of the
        FPMM beyond the tolerance, the strategy atomically 
        (i) withdraws the missing JPY.m from the Stability Pool and (ii)
        deposits the required amount of USD.m back into the Stability Pool—
        all within a single transaction.
        The FPMM ends up replenished with fresh JPY.m, while the Stability Pool
        records an equivalent USD.m inflow.\footnote{If the Stability Pools does not hold enough JPY.m, the protocol cannot auto-rebalance. The protocol therefore directs rewards towards the Stability Pool to ensure that there is a strong incentive for borrowers to borrow more JPY.m into existence and add them to the Stability Pool pool in the case of low Stability Pool JPY.m balances. This is equivalent to the standard Liquity~V2~\cite{liquity_v2} case in which a sufficient Stability Pool JPY.m balance is required for liquidations. The only difference is that in the FPMM case, the JPYm. balance is required not only for liquidations but also for flash-swap expansions.}

>   \item \textbf{Flash\hyp swap contract} – If traders have reduced the USD.m reserves of the FPMM beyond the tolerance, the strategy reverses the above trade: it withdraws USD.m from the Stability Pool and repays an equivalent amount of JPY.m to the Stability Pool. If there is not enough USD.m in the Stability Pool, the CDP Liquidity Strategy uses the redeem functionality of the Liquity~V2~\cite{liquity_v2} CDP setup to redeem JPY.m for USD.m until the FPMM regains its target ratio.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  \item \textbf{Flash\hyp swap contract} – If traders have reduced the USD.m reserves of the FPMM below the threshold, the strategy reverses the above trade: it withdraws USD.m from the Stability Pool and repays an equivalent amount of JPY.m to the Stability Pool. If there is not enough USD.m in the Stability Pool, the CDP Liquidity Strategy uses the redeem functionality of the Liquity~V2~\cite{liquity_v2} CDP setup to redeem JPY.m for USD.m until the FPMM regains its target ratio.
```

\end{itemize}
\begin{figure}[ht]
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=0.6\linewidth]{figures/fpmm_3.png}
    \caption{Reserve strategy: mint\/burn at the oracle price using Reserve collateral.}
\end{figure}

\subsubsection{Mento CDP Liquidity Strategy}\label{str:cdp}
This module services \emph{synthetic} stablecoins that
are created by posting another on-chain asset as collateral inside a CDP
engine.  We illustrate the mechanics with the pair
\texttt{JPY.m}\,$\leftrightarrow$\,USD.m—JPY.m is the synthetic JPY stablecoin
and USD.m is the collateral locked in CDPs.

In Liquity~V2~\cite{liquity_v2} the Stability Pool is a
contract that holds deposits of the \emph{stablecoin} (here JPY.m) and absorbs
liquidations when troves (= CDP positions) fall below the required collateral ratio.  We extend
this design so that the Stability Pool can also act as the counterparty to
flash-swaps: it is allowed to temporarily lend JPY.m to the FPMM as long as it
receives the equivalent amount of USD.m (or vice-versa) in the same
transaction.  This small change lets one contract both maintain solvency of the
CDP system \emph{and} keep the FPMM balanced.\\

> In the Mento CDP Liquidity Strategy, flash-swaps work as follows:

Author: covered both now

\begin{itemize}
  \item \textbf{Flash\hyp swap expand} – If traders have emptied the
        pool's JPY.m side, the strategy atomically 
        It (i) withdraws the missing JPY.m from the Stability Pool and (ii)
        deposits the required amount of USD.m back into the Stability Pool—
        all within a single transaction.
        The pool ends up replenished with fresh JPY.m, while the Stability Pool
        records an equal USD.m claim.
  \item \textbf{Flash\hyp swap contract} – If the pool is long JPY.m and

>         short USD.m, the strategy reverses the above trade: it withdraws USD.m

Author: Yeah, good call-out - this was simply not well explained. Updated it.

        from the Stability Pool, repays JPY.m and burns the surplus.  The pool
        regains its target ratio.
\end{itemize}
\begin{figure}[ht]
    \centering

>     \includegraphics[width=0.6\linewidth]{figures/fpmm_1.png}

Author: yeah that's always an issue with latex which tries to find the "best" spot for figures automatically. Will see what I can do

  \item \textbf{Value-preservation invariant}\,: The actual solvency check is enforced inside the pool contract itself.  After the strategy's callback has run, \verb|FPMM.rebalance| validates that (C1) the price deviation has decreased, (C2) no over\hyp shoot occurred, and (C3) the pool value did not decline by more than the allowed incentive \(\gamma\).  Should any condition fail, the entire transaction reverts, ensuring that a faulty strategy implementation cannot drain liquidity.
  \item \textbf{Extensibility hook}\,: Derived contracts override \verb|_executeRebalance|, compute the token movements specific to their liquidity source, and implement a \verb|hook| function that the pool invokes during the flash\hyp swap.
\end{itemize}

% ----------------------------------------------------------------
%  Oracle & Risk Controls (
% ----------------------------------------------------------------
\subsection{Circuit Breakers and Oracle Risk Controls}\label{sec:breaker_box}
Fixed\hyp price pools only work if the oracle they reference is
trustworthy. A stale, manipulated or wildly gapping FX feed would let
traders extract inventory at an unfair rate.

> Mento therefore surrounds every FPMM with a innovative \emph{Breaker Box}\,—a

Author: done

        \begin{itemize}[leftmargin=*]
          \item If the oracle has not updated yet, no trade can profitably front-run the incoming price, and
          \item users are guaranteed execution within a narrow, bounded band around the off-chain FX rate.
        \end{itemize}
\end{itemize}

The layers described next limit the \emph{worst-case loss} should an extreme price jump outrun the spread before an oracle update is mined.

% ---------------------------------------------------------------
%  Oracle Risk Management Layers
% ---------------------------------------------------------------
Because oracle integrity is mission-critical, Mento provides several defensive lines:

\begin{itemize}[leftmargin=*]
  \item \textbf{Oracle circuit breakers} – trading pauses automatically if a feed deviates beyond pre-set risk bounds or stalls for longer than an expiry window.
  \item \textbf{Time-weighted trading limits} – sliding-window caps restrict the notional that can leave a pool per block/hour, containing potential inventory drain while an oracle is impaired.

>   \item \textbf{Multi-provider redundancy} – all price checks consult both Chainlink and RedStone (and any future feeds) so that a single provider outage cannot bring down pricing.

Author: understood and adjusted

\subsection{Cross\hyp Chain Deployment}
FPMMs can be deployed on any EVM chain.  A hub\hyp and\hyp spoke design (Fig.~\ref{fig:cross_chain})
anchors collateral in a shared Reserve while pools on satellite chains provide native UX and
gas savings.

\begin{figure}[H]
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=0.75\linewidth]{figures/fpmm_4.png}
    \caption{Cross\hyp chain architecture: independent FPMM instances share collateral via a
    common Reserve.}
    \label{fig:cross_chain}
\end{figure}

\section{Mento Protocol Incentive Design}
\label{sec:incentive_structure}

Mento employs a layered incentive system that aligns every economic actor—borrowers, liquidity providers, veMENTO stakers, Stability Pool depositors and keeper bots—around three core objectives:  (i) safeguarding protocol solvency, (ii) keeping the stablecoins pegged, and (iii) creating sustainable fee income that can be shared with tokenholders. The design draws heavily on the Liquity~V2 model but adds FPMM-related incentives and governance\hyp controlled MENTO emissions.\\

\subsection{Core Incentives}
\subsubsection*{Continuous Interest and its Distribution}
\begin{itemize}

>   \item \textbf{Floating interest rate}\,:  Each CDP (called ``trove'' in the Liquity V2 design Mento CDPS are based on) that mints a Mento stablecoin pays a continuously compounding interest rate $r(t)$ on its debt.

Author: fixed

  \item \textbf{Protocol revenue stream}\,:  In addition to the interest earned on Mento Reserve assets, aggregate interest paid by all Mento stablecoin borrowers constitutes the main recurring income of the protocol (denoted $I_{\mathrm{total}}$ per block).
  \item \textbf{Split between solvency backstop and governance token}\,:  A governance parameter \texttt{SP\_YIELD\_SPLIT}\,$=\,\alpha\,\in[0,1]$ directs a fraction $\alpha I_{\mathrm{total}}$ to the Stability Pool (SP) and the remainder $(1-\alpha) I_{\mathrm{total}}$ to veMENTO stakers.  Changing $\alpha$ lets governance fine\hyp tune the risk/reward mix between backstopping liquidations and rewarding long\hyp term tokenholders.
\end{itemize}

\subsubsection*{Incentives for Stability Pool Depositors}
\begin{itemize}
  \item \textbf{Liquidation gains}\,:  When a trove falls below its collateral ratio, the SP cancels its debt and receives the collateral at a discount.
  \item \textbf{Interest share}\,:  SP depositors earn $\alpha I_{\mathrm{total}}$ pro rata, paid in the borrowed stablecoin.

>   \item \textbf{Flash\hyp swap premium}\,:  When a keeper triggers a \emph{flash\hyp swap} because the FPMM has drifted off its target inventory, the strategy purchases the missing stablecoins from the SP at a slightly \emph{better} rate than the oracle price, expressed as $P_{\mathrm{oracle}}\bigl(1+\phi_{\mathrm{fs}}\bigr)$, where $\phi_{\mathrm{fs}}$ is the governance\hyp set \texttt{sp\_flashswap\_premium}.  The price premium is paid pro rata to the depositors whose stablecoins are sourced.

Reviewer: @baroooo @philbow61 @bayological is the flash swap premium part of the current cdp liquidity strategy implementation?

\end{itemize}

\subsubsection*{Rewards for veMENTO Stakers}
\begin{itemize}
  \item \textbf{Interest flow}\,:  veMENTO stakers capture $(1-\alpha) I_{\mathrm{total}}$, creating a direct link between protocol usage and token yield.
  \item \textbf{Governance rights}\,:  The same veMENTO balance determines a holder's voting weight over parameters such as \texttt{SP\_YIELD\_SPLIT}, new collateral listings or incentive emission rates.
  \item \textbf{Buyback and burn programme}\,:  Beginning immediately after the Token Generation Event (TGE), the protocol intends to plough the majority of its net revenue—including interest income, swap fees and any other cash-flows—into automated open-market repurchases of MENTO.  Purchased tokens will either be burned or deposited into the Community Treasury, creating continuous, value-accretive demand for the token and reinforcing long-term alignment between protocol usage and tokenholder upside.
\end{itemize}

\subsubsection*{Redemption Mechanics and Trove Compensation}
\begin{itemize}

>   \item \textbf{Trove selection}\,:  When users redeem stablecoins for collateral, v2 targets troves with the \emph{lowest} interest rate first, effectively encouraging borrowers to keep rates competitive.

Author: done

  \item \textbf{Redemption fee}\,:  The fee is paid in collateral and added \emph{directly} to the redeemed trove rather than to veMENTO stakers.  This compensates the borrower for the forced deleveraging and preserves peg stability.
\end{itemize}

\subsubsection*{FPMM Liquidity Provider Incentives}
\begin{itemize}
  \item \textbf{Spread capture}\,:  FPMM LPs quote a fixed bid/ask around the oracle price and earn the embedded spread on each user swap.

>   \item \textbf{MENTO emissions via gauges}\,:  A governor\hyp controlled ``gauge'' streams a capped USD value of MENTO tokens to staked LP tokens, ensuring competitive on\hyp chain liquidity without overpaying.

Author: We need to discuss this more but there is a significant downside to the potentially large swings in the usd scale of incentives when the protocol denominates incentives in MENTO instead (sometimes the protocol massively overpays, sometimes it massively underpays).

>   \item \textbf{MENTO emissions via gauges}\,:  A governor\hyp controlled ``gauge'' streams a capped USD value of MENTO tokens to staked LP tokens, ensuring competitive on\hyp chain liquidity without overpaying.

Reviewer: I'll put it on our sync agenda for Wednesday

>   \item \textbf{Swap fee (\texttt{amm\_fee})}\,:  Every trade pays an additional micro\hyp fee that flows \emph{entirely} to LPs during normal, two\hyp sided volume.

Reviewer: why do we highlight _entirely_ here? as it stands it reads as if all three components (spread / mentor emissions / swap fee) go entirely to LPs

\end{itemize}

\subsubsection*{Keeper Bots for Flash\hyp Swaps}
\begin{itemize}

> \item A network of permissionless keeper bots monitors inventory drift.  When the pool breaches its tolerance band they atomically call \verb|rebalance(poolId)|, executing the flash\hyp swap.  Each successful call earns a flat, governor\hyp set MENTO bounty (denominated in USD) sized at roughly $1.5\times$ the prevailing gas cost so that maintenance remains profitable on any chain.

Reviewer: i believe currently the code actually has a rebalancing reward that is paid out in either token A or token B of an fpmm, maybe I'm missing something but whitepaper and code don't seem aligned here

/cc @baroooo @philbow61

Author: @baroooo @philbow61 can you let me know how this is currently implemented?

    
    \item Integration in Popular Wallets: Mento stablecoins are integrated into popular end-user facing wallets, including Opera's MiniPay and Valora. Such integrations significantly enhance the accessibility and usability of Mento stablecoins for a broad user base, allowing for easy storage, management, and transfer. The presence of Mento stablecoins in these wallets demonstrates that its digital assets are convenient to use for everyday transactions, further bridging the gap between traditional financial systems and Web3 technology.
\end{itemize}

The following sections provide more detail about the Mento Platform components that help achieve the above properties and ultimately make Mento stablecoins useful in the real world. For even more technical details, please visit Mento on GitHub \cite{mento_github}.

\subsection{ MENTO Governance Token}\label{sec:gov_token}

\subsubsection{Governance Architecture}
\begin{figure}[ht]
    \centering

>     \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{figures/mento_governance.png}

Reviewer: we should update this graphic with the new brand colors

>     \item Voting rights: No.

Reviewer: should probably refresh the token allocation section a bit to be aligned with latest updates, i.e. no longer using hedgey

Author: done

\end{itemize}

\section{Roadmap and Future Developments}
\label{sec:roadmap}

The Mento Platform's development path is structured around clear, actionable objectives aimed at broadening its financial ecosystem. Central to this expansion are the introduction of the MENTO token and the establishment of a decentralized governance structure.

\begin{itemize}
    \item \textbf{Governance Transition:}

>     The Mento Governance was activated on (July 2025) and the MENTO token was previously distributed according to the allocations described in Section \ref{sec:token_distribution}. This new structure now empowers the community to propose, debate, and implement changes directly through a democratic voting process. Initial governance actions will focus on community-led development and innovation. 

Reviewer: reminder to replace (July 2025) with a concrete date or instead just say "was activated in July 2025"
